.TH FUNKY 1 "2026-05-04" "funky 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
funky \- C/C++ code formatter with Unicode support
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B funky
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFILE\fR [\fIFILE\fR ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B funky
reads one or more C or C++ source files, applies whitespace and brace
formatting rules, and writes the result to standard output (default),
edits the files in place
.RB ( \-i ),
or checks whether any file would change
.RB ( \-\-check ).
.PP
The formatter is Unicode-safe: identifiers, string literals, and comments
containing multi-byte UTF-8 sequences (CJK characters, accented letters,
etc.) are preserved verbatim.
.PP
Formatting rules are controlled by a
.I funky.toml
file in the current directory, or by the file given with
.BR \-c .
All configuration keys are optional; built-in defaults are used for any
keys that are absent.
.PP
Pass
.B \-
as a file argument to read from standard input and write to standard output.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-in\-place
Edit each file in place instead of writing to standard output.
Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-\-check .
.TP
.B \-\-check
Check mode: exit with status 1 if any file would be changed by formatting;
do not write any output.  The name of each file that would change is
printed to standard error.
Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-i .
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-recursive
Recurse into directories.  Without this flag, passing a directory path is
an error.  When recursing, only files with recognised C/C++ extensions
.RB ( .c ", " .cc ", " .cpp ", " .cxx ", " .c++ ", " .h ", " .hh ", " .hpp ", " .hxx )
are processed.  Files matching patterns in
.B [ignore]
are skipped.
.TP
.BI \-c " FILE" "\fR,\fP \-\-config " FILE
Load configuration from
.I FILE
instead of the default
.IR funky.toml .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a brief help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version number and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is read from
.B funky.toml
in the current directory, or from the path given with
.BR \-c .
The file uses TOML syntax.  All keys are optional.
.SS [indent]
.TP
.B style
.IR "\"spaces\"" " (default) or " "\"tabs\""
.TP
.B width
Number of spaces per indentation level when
.B style = "spaces"\c
\&.
Default: 4.
.SS [braces]
.TP
.B style
.IR "\"kr\"" " (default), " "\"allman\"" ", or " "\"stroustrup\"" .
.RS
.TP
.B kr
Opening brace at end of the controlling line:
.IR "if (cond) {" .
.TP
.B allman
Opening brace on its own line.
.TP
.B stroustrup
Like K&R, but
.B else
and
.B catch
start on a new line.
.RE
.TP
.B cuddle_else
When true (default), place
.B "} else {"
on a single line.
.TP
.B cuddle_catch
When true (default), place
.B "} catch ("
on a single line.
.TP
.B collapse_empty_body
When true (default), collapse
.B "{\en}"
to
.BR "{}" .
.TP
.B fn_brace_newline
When true (default), force the opening brace of every function definition
onto its own line, regardless of
.BR style .
Control-flow braces are not affected.
.TP
.B expand_large_initializers
When true (default), expand flat initializer lists with multiple elements
to one element per line.
.SS [spacing]
.TP
.B space_before_call_paren
Insert a space before
.B (
in function calls.
Default: false.
.TP
.B space_before_keyword_paren
Insert a space before
.B (
after keywords such as
.BR if ", " for ", " while .
Default: true.
.TP
.B space_after_comma
Insert a space after every
.BR , .
Default: true.
.TP
.B space_around_binary_ops
Insert spaces around binary operators.
Default: true.
.TP
.B space_inside_parens
Insert a space inside
.B (
\&...
.BR ) .
Default: false.
.TP
.B space_inside_brackets
Insert a space inside
.B [
\&...
.BR ] .
Default: false.
.TP
.B space_after_cast
Insert a space after a C-style cast.
Default: false.
.TP
.B pointer_align
Spacing around declarator
.B *
and
.B &\c
\&.
.RS
.TP
.B "\"type\""
.I "int* p"
.TP
.B "\"name\""
(default)
.I "int *p"
.TP
.B "\"middle\""
.I "int * p"
.RE
.TP
.B space_inside_angle_brackets
Insert spaces inside
.B <
\&...
.B >
in templates.
Default: false.
.TP
.B align_right_cmt_span
Column-align trailing
.B //
comments across consecutive lines that all have a trailing comment.
0 disables alignment.
Default: 3.
.TP
.B align_enum_equ_span
Column-align
.B =
signs in consecutive enum value lines.
0 disables.
Default: 1.
.TP
.B align_doxygen_cmt_span
Column-align Doxygen
.B /**<
member comments across consecutive struct member lines.
0 disables.
Default: 1.
.SS [newlines]
.TP
.B style
.IR "\"lf\"" " (default), " "\"crlf\"" ", or " "\"native\"" .
.TP
.B max_blank_lines
Maximum number of consecutive blank lines preserved.
Default: 2.
.TP
.B final_newline
Ensure the file ends with a newline.
Default: true.
.TP
.B blank_line_after_var_decl_block
Insert a blank line between the leading variable-declaration block and
the first statement in a function body.
Default: true.
.TP
.B blank_line_after_open_brace
Insert a blank line immediately after the opening
.B {
of function bodies and control-flow blocks.
Default: false.
.TP
.B merge_line_comment
When a standalone
.B //
comment immediately follows a
.BR { ,
.BR } ,
or
.B ;
with no intervening blank lines, move it to the end of that line as an
inline trailing comment.
Default: false.
.SS [ignore]
.TP
.B patterns
List of glob patterns (relative to the directory root) for files to skip
when using
.BR \-\-recursive .
Example:
.IR "patterns = [\"vendor/**\", \"*.pb.h\"]" .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (or no files would change in
.B \-\-check
mode).
.TP
.B 1
One or more files would change (
.B \-\-check
mode only), or a fatal error occurred.
.SH EXAMPLES
Format a file to standard output:
.PP
.RS
.B funky src/foo.c
.RE
.PP
Edit multiple files in place:
.PP
.RS
.B funky \-i src/foo.c include/bar.h
.RE
.PP
Check an entire source tree in CI:
.PP
.RS
.B funky \-\-check \-r src/
.RE
.PP
Pipe through standard input:
.PP
.RS
.B cat ugly.c | funky \- > pretty.c
.RE
.PP
Use a project-specific config:
.PP
.RS
.B funky \-c /etc/funky.toml \-i src/
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I funky.toml
Default configuration file, searched in the current working directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR clang-format (1),
.BR uncrustify (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Brandon Arrendondo and contributors.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
